Elevational clines predict genetically determined variation in tropical forest seedling performance in Borneo: implications for seed sourcing to support reforestation.E Petter Axelsson, Ulrik Ilstedt, David Alloysius, Kevin C GradyFirst published: 23 October 2023 https://doi.org/10.1111/rec.14038Author contributions: EPA, UI, DA, KCG conceived and designed the research; EPA, DA, KCG implemented the experiment and collected experimental data; EPA analyzed the data; EPA, KCG led the writing of the manuscript; all authors contributed significantly in writing, reviewing, and editing.Coordinating Editor: Stephen Murphy.Abstract.While much research has focused on genetic variation in plants in relation to abiotic clines in temperate and boreal forests, few studies have examined similar relationships in tropical forests. Genetic variation in desirable performance traits of trees, such as drought tolerance, fast_growth, and carbon sequestration rates, is widely used to improve reforestation efforts in nontropical systems. However, evolutionary processes such as local adaptation are poorly understood in tropical forests making it difficult to locate desired phenotypes. To test for genetic variation in growth rate in relationship to climatic clines, we conducted a common garden study over 18 months in a nursery using four dipterocarp tree species, represented by 9_12 half_sib families, sourced across an elevational gradient ranging from lowland to hill forests (circa 130_470 m above sea_level) in Malaysian Borneo. We found genetic variation in growth for all four species with fast_growing half_sib families growing 42_88% faster than poorly performing half_sib families. Furthermore, in three species we found that elevation of seedling origin predicted seedling performance; in Shorea fallax and S. johorensis, half_sib families originating from low elevations performed the best. In S. argentifolia half_sib families' seedlings from low elevations grew slowly. Because elevation is a good proxy for climate, the finding of elevational clines predicting genetic variation in growth provides evidence of evolution affecting the function of tropical tree species. Our research highlights opportunities to better understand evolutionary processes in tropical forests and to use such information to improve seed source selection in reforestation.Implications for Practice* Tree species from the dipterocarp family contain considerable genetic variation in growth that is useful for enhancing restoration or plantation forestry using native tree species.* Part of this variation in growth rate is predicted by a commonly used proxy of climate variation, that is elevation, a novel result that provides rarely found evidence of local adaptation in tropical forests.* Increased understanding of evolutionary processes resulting in genetic variation of desirable plant traits could improve seed sourcing guidelines for use in reforestation of tropical forests.Introduction.Ambitious targets to reforest millions of hectares of degraded tropical forests requires the propagation of seedlings with favorable traits, such as those adapted to future climate scenarios or those that enhance seedling survival, or that are beneficial for maximizing growth and carbon sequestration rates to mitigate climate change (Gregorio et al 2017). Poorly selected seed sources may result in slow growth and low survival of seedlings and increase the cost of reforestation (Gregorio et al 2017; Jalonen et al 2018). Furthermore, with climate change there is a need to consider changing biophysical conditions of the future to foresee that restoration is successful (Harris et al 2006). In cases when locally adapted populations risk becoming maladapted for future climates (Alberto et al 2013; Isaac_Renton et al 2018; Barton et al 2020) there may be a need to ensure that genetic variation can be sustained to promote adaptation or to pre_adapt species used in tropical forest restoration to future climatic conditions (Axelsson et al 2020). Although such concepts have been well applied in temperate forests due to extensive research into causes of local adaptation, such applications are not yet well_applied to tropical forests where the underlying causes of genetic variation remain poorly understood (Axelsson et al 2020), but see Barton et al (2020) and Ng et al (2021). Predictions of the impacts of climate change to the genetic structure of tropical forests and the consequences to tree performance are untenable without understanding how biotic and abiotic forces shape genetic structure.Due to the rarity of forest research in the tropics assessing the causes of intraspecific variation of tree species (Grady & Axelsson accepted), we are currently unable to: (1) predict climate change impacts on selection of traits that would be favorable in a future climate, and; (2) predict geographically where we might find traits with desirable properties for use in reforestation. A better understanding of both may have dramatic benefits to the future success of reforestation projects as well as increase the use of native species with desirable properties compared to exotic species that are currently commonly used in tropical reforestation efforts. For example, pioneer Forest Landscape Restoration programs, large_scale projects across thousands of hectares such as those implemented in China (Xu 2011) and South Korea (Temperton et al 2014), focus almost exclusively on the use of exotic tree species to increase tree cover in deforested landscapes. Because such seedlings are readily available due to their widespread use in commercial forestry, they are cheaper, and easier to obtain than native tree species. Information on native tree seed collection and seedling production is scarce and so they are used less in reforestation and rarely in plantation forestry (Brancalion et al 2012; Nunes et al 2016; Moreira da Silva et al 2017). Improved understanding of the extent and evolutionary causes of functional and adaptive genetic variation of native tree species in tropical forests could be used to direct seed collection campaigns and help improve nursery practices to support reforestation and restoration of native forests. Such information could also help pre_adapt restored native forests to future climates (Axelsson et al 2020).Although hyper_diverse tropical forests may contain high genetic variation on small spatial scales (Harata et al 2012; Tito de Morais et al 2015; Lee et al 2016), there is a fundamental lack of information about how this variation may be shaped by broad geographic variation in abiotic factors. Although the distribution of tropical tree species are known to be determined by abiotic conditions such as soil characteristics on small spatial scales (Paoli et al 2006; Bartholomew et al 2022) and climate on larger scales (Engelbrecht et al 2005), whether or not populations are locally adapted to the same abiotic conditions is unclear (Grady & Axelsson accepted). Nevertheless, the importance of such factors has been highlighted in some recent studies (Axelsson et al 2020; Barton et al 2020; Ng et al 2021), for example by Ng et al (2021) who highlights the evolutionary relevance of drought in aseasonal tropical rainforests. While abiotic variation certainly exists across highly diverse tropical landscapes, how it impacts genetic variation is not well known. Because precipitation is generally high across all rainforests such as in Borneo, and temperatures do not fluctuate greatly, it is possible that precipitation and temperature do not lead to selection. However, while direct adaptation to abiotic conditions such as water availability and temperature may seem unlikely in wet tropical forests, the amount and seasonality of rainfall does vary across elevational gradients. Differences in rainfall are known to alter community composition of trees inferred to be due to adaptive variation that favors some species over others in different environments (Engelbrecht et al 2005). If this is the case at the inter_specific level, why would it not hold within species at the intra_specific level  Elevation is generally well correlated to environmental and climate variables such as temperature and precipitation and is commonly used to examine how genetic variation may be structured by climate (Grady et al 2011; Isaac_Renton et al 2018; Vanhove et al 2021). Although past research in tropical forests has found genetic variation in plant traits and drought tolerance (Axelsson et al 2020), such variation has rarely been correlated to abiotic clines such as edaphic, thermal, or precipitation gradients. A better understanding about the influences of abiotic clines on genetic variation in tropical forests could have a tremendous impact on the output of tropical forest restoration such as already shown in other systems (Grady et al 2015).Although elevational gradients, by being well_correlated to climate, are known to shape the structure of tree populations, it is difficult to partition the relative strength of the often covarying effects between the biotic and abiotic factors that influence genetic structure. For example, elevational gradients also commonly impact the biotic community that, in turn, may influence selection; that is high elevation tropical forests have lower tree density and overall stand biomass than low elevation forests (Alves et al 2010; Nasto et al 2017; Rozendaal et al 2020). Consequently, the strength of both inter_ and intra_specific competition have been shown to vary by elevation in tropical forests (Levine et al 2016). As a result, competition for light and nutrients may be higher at low elevation, potentially resulting in selection for competitive traits such as fast growth. Additionally, interactions with plant pathogens have been shown to vary by population and climate with plants with certain traits more resistant to pathogens, such that climate change favors certain populations over others in resistance to the combined influences of climate and pathogens (Grady et al 2015). Nevertheless, although the actual agent of selection may be elusive, assessing if, and in what way, elevational clines shape genetic variation in tree performance would provide a first step into understanding evolutionary processes in action in tropical forests.We established a common garden experiment in a nursery using four dipterocarp tree species each represented by 9_12 half_sib families collected across an elevational range of 130_470 m above sea_level (asl) encompassing both lowland dipterocarp forest (< 350 m asl) and hill forests (> 350 m asl). We tested for genetic variation in growth performance in a nursery and assessed to what extent variation was related to differences in elevation among seed sources. We explicitly tested two main hypotheses: (1) genetic variation in growth rate exists among different half sib families, and; (2) this variation is correlated to differences in elevation among seed sources of half sib families suggesting the potential for local adaptation to be influencing the genetic structure of our study species. Elucidating that genetic variation in plant performance corresponds to an elevational gradient is a first step for a better understanding of the evolutionary causes of genetic variation in tropical forests.Methods.Genetic Material Collection.We established a multi_species common garden experiment in a nursey with four species of dipterocarps (Shorea argentifolia, S. fallax, S. johorensis, and S. paucifolia) that are all commonly used in reforestation efforts in mixed_dipterocarp forests of Borneo. All four species have similar habitat requirements and basic characteristics with small differences among species (Table 1). For example, all four species occur on lowland and hill forests but S. argentifolia and S. fallax are often associated with clay soils while no soil_type association has been reported for S. pauciflora or S. johorensis. Furthermore, S. argentifolia occurs up to an elevation of 700 m asl while S. johorensis typically occurs below 600 m asl (Table 1). There are information suggesting that tree communities in these forests may be determined by soil variables on small_to_large spatial scales (Russo et al 2005; Paoli et al 2006) and climate variables on larger scales (Miyamoto et al 2021).Table 1. Basic ecological and physiological characteristics of four dipterocarp tree species used to test for elevational clines in a nursery_based common garden experiment in Sabah, Malaysia on the island of Borneo. Source: Data compiled from Ghazoul (2016).Tree speciesOccurrenceElevationWood densityShorea johorensisLocally common and occur on well_drained flat and undulating landBelow 600 m320_695 kg/m3S. argentifoliaLocally abundant and gregarious and is found on clay soils, usually on undulating land and valleysUp to 680 m480_835 kg/m3S. paucifloraOccur on well_drained deep soils in lowland and hill forests up to 700 m altitudeUp to 700 m490_835 kg/m3S. fallaxLocally frequent on clay soils in mixed dipterocarp forests on well drained flat or hilly sidesUp to 600 m560_960 kg/m3We took advantage of a strong mast fruiting year in 2019 to collect seeds from 9 to 12 different mother trees from each of four species. All seeds were collected between August 19 and September 11, 2019. All seed collections were done within an area framed by Imbak Canyon conservation area in the north, Danum Valley INFAPRO Rainforest rehabilitation project to the east, INIKEA_Sow_a_seed restoration project to the south, and Maliau Basin conservation area to the west (Fig 1). We designed the collection to be as logistically efficient as possible and most collection was done in areas accessible by roads. We made sure to cover an elevational gradient ranging from approximately 130 m asl to approximately 470 m asl as recorded with a GPS_devise (Table 2) but due to difficulty in finding the same trees at all collection sites, the distribution of mother trees across the gradient varied among the different species. We used elevation as a proxy for a combination of covarying abiotic factors such as precipitation and temperature because they are well correlated and together often influence variation among traits of different plant populations. Due to the physical remoteness of our population seed sources, reliable weather data were not available for our source populations. Nevertheless, our rough estimates based on data from four weather stations covering the full range of elevations of our seed collections (ie Tawau airport at 17 m asl, Luasong at 300 m asl, Danum valley at 427 m asl, and Maliau basin at 500 m asl) suggests that these populations would experience an average precipitation of 155 mm/month in low elevation populations and 262 mm/month in high elevation populations, representing an increase of approximately 60% from low to high elevations (Fig 2). Such a difference has been shown to influence vegetation dynamics (Engelbrecht et al 2005), and here, we examine if this same degree of variation might impact evolutionary dynamics. The climatic differences across our gradient of collection are also reflected in air temperature with higher temperatures at lower elevations. For example, at the airport in Tawau, the mean daily maximum air temperature is 1.4 degrees C higher than at Maliau Basin (30.1 vs. 28.7 degrees C). This gradient also covers both lowland mixed_dipterocarp forest (<350 m asl) and hill forests (>350 m asl) that differ in tree species composition and forest structure (Manokaran & Kochummen 1994). For example, dipterocarp hill forests are dominated by slow growing species whereas faster growing species are more commonly found in lowland mixed_dipterocarp forests of southeast Asia (Manokaran & Kochummen 1994). All seeds were collected from the forest floor underneath individual mother trees separated from each other by at least 100 m to ensure that collected materials were distinct half_sib families (ie maternal lines). Seeds were germinated on seedbeds in the INIKEA nursery in Luasong (4 degrees 37.43 N, 117 degrees 12.15  E, asl 300 m) immediately following collection.Figure 1Map highlighting the location of Yayasan Sabah's management concession in Sabah, Borneo, Malaysia in green, with the area of seed collection for assessing geographically determined genetic variation in seedling growth roughly framed by Imbak Canyon conservation area in the north, INFAPRO Rainforest rehabilitation project to the east, INIKEA_Sow_a_seed restoration project to the south, and Maliau Basin conservation area to the west.Table 2. Number of half_sib families of four tree species of the dipterocarp family used in a nursery_based growth performance common garden experiment in the town of Luasong in Sabah, Malaysia on the island of Borneo. The different half_sib families originate from a geographical gradient that varies in elevation from roughly 128 to 476 m asl depending on species.SpeciesHalf_sib familiesElevation rangeShorea argentifolia12129_476S. fallax12129_464S. johorensis9129_423S. pauciflora11128_417Figure 2Patterns of monthly average precipitation (mm) across an elevational gradient ranging across Tawau airport at 17 m asl, Luasong at 300 m asl, Danum valley at 427 m asl, and Maliau basin at 500 m asl Blue dots represent elevational ranges (maximum and minimum) of half_sib seed collection. Across the range of seed collection sites, populations are expected to face an increase in precipitation from 155 to 262 mm (~60%). Tawau data are from a meteorological station at the Tawau airport and was compiled from https://www.meteoblue.com/ between 1992 and 2022. Data for Luasong is from records from the INIKEA restoration project northwest of the town of Luasong and represents the period of 2004_2016. Data for Danum and Maliau was compiled from the Danum Valley Research Station and Maliau Basin Research Station weather stations between 2010 and 2016.After germination, seeds were planted in polyethylene bags (6 cm diameter by 40 cm height) filled with soil as a mixture of mineral soil and compost at a ratio of 1:1. The compost was produced by mixing saw dust, dry grass, and urea into locally collected mineral soil, and kept for approximately 6 months prior to using for potting. To account for environmental variation within the nursery, we distributed all half_siblings into five distinct areas within the nursery (blocks) and within these blocks we ensured that each half_sib family was represented by at least one seedling (range: 1_6, median: 2) in each of seven sub_blocks. This was done to ensure that all species and half_sibs were exposed to the same range of environmental conditions within the nursery. The shade house included mesh screen approximately 2.5 m height as a ceiling and was open to the air around the perimeter. In February 2021, we recorded the height as measured from the soil surface to the top of the highest green leader of each plant and diameter at root collar (2 cm above soil surface) of all seedlings. These measurements correspond to the size gained since collection of un_germinated seeds and represents a measure of nursery growth performance which is crucial for effective propagation of viable seedlings for out_planting. The time elapsed from seed collection to the seedling size measurement varied between 523 and 546 days. The variation in time between collection and measurements among half_sib families was 2.8% for S. johorensis, 3.5% for S. argentifolia, 3.7% for S. fallax, and 4.2% for S. paucifora.Statistical AnalysesWe used general linear models to test for genetic effects on nursery growth performance (seedling height and seedling collar basal area). To account for slight differences in seed collection dates, we normalized seedling height and collar diameter by the number of days elapsed between seed collection and measurements in the nursery. As the data were normally distributed, we ran analyses on untransformed data using a normal distribution model. To account for possible environmental variation within the nursery, we used the five growing areas in the nursery as a random blocking factor in all analyses. As the seven sub_blocks within each main block sometimes included more than one seedling per full_sib family, we used mean values for each of the seven sub_blocks in our analyses to ensure independence. With five blocks and seven independent samples in each block our sample size was 35 per half_sib family. For the species that showed genetic variation in growth performance, we also tested to what extent growth performance varied by elevation (as it happened, all four species revealed a significant effect of half sib family and hence all four species were included in the second analysis). To accomplish this, we ran linear regressions between mean seedling performance of each half_sib family and elevation of the seed source (that is, mother tree). All statistical analyses were conducted in JMP16 pro (SAS 2020_2021). We tested for significance at the 0.05 alpha level.Results.Our first hypothesis that different half sib families varied in nursery growth rate was supported for all four species and for both height and diameter (p < 0.005 in all cases; Table 3). Normalized growth rate of top performing half_sibs was 32_74% (height) and 42_88% (basal area) higher than growth of the most poorly performing half_sibs depending on species (Table 4).Table 3. Results from generalized linear models testing for the effect of half_sib family and block on seedling performance, that is height and diameter gained in the nursery of four different species of dipterocarps growing for 18 months. Bold p_values denote statistical significance at p < 0.05.Basal areaHeightDFSSFpSSFpShorea argentifoliaHalf sib family110.03813.019<0.00010.05010.961<0.0001Block40.0043.7230.0060.0063.4100.010Half sib family   block440.0070.6470.9600.0130.7000.925S. fallaxHalf sib family110.05415.361<0.00010.05012.191<0.0001Block40.0010.6860.6020.0032.1610.073Half sib family   block440.0161.1010.3140.0120.7330.895S. johorensisHalf sib family80.0124.581<0.00010.0244.788<0.0001Block40.0000.3400.8510.0031.2750.281Half sib family   block320.0151.4570.0620.0130.6390.935S. paucifloraSourceHalf sib family100.0062.6240.0050.0327.435<0.0001Block40.0022.0470.0880.0105.633<0.001Half sib family   block400.0060.6460.9520.0100.5570.9863Table 4. Genetic variation among half_sib families of four different tree species in seedling performance in the nursery with percentages relating to relative differences of top performing half_sib families in comparison to poorly performing half_sib families. Realized refers to the actual size gained in the nursery and Normalized refers to the size adjusted for slight differences in seed collection dates.SpeciesHeightBasal areaRealizedNormalizedRealizedNormalizedShorea argentifolia41%39%85%88%Shorea fallax74%72%78%80%Shorea johorensis30%32%61%60%Shorea pauciflora75%74%41%42%Confirming our second hypothesis that part of this variation was related to the elevation of the seed source of the seedlings, we found a significant correlation between performance and elevation for three out of our four study species (Fig 3). In Shorea argentifolia half_sib families' originating from an elevation of 476 m grew roughly 55% larger in basal area than families originating from an elevation of 130 m. In S. fallax and S. johorensis, half_sib families originating from low elevations performed the best. In S. fallax, families originating from an elevation of 130 m grew approximately 40% more in basal area compared to families originating from an elevation of 460 m. The S. johorensis families originating from an elevation of 130 m grew 25% more in diameter than families originating from 420 m elevation. Taken together, these results suggest that elevation as a proxy for climate, resulted in natural selection for three out of four species in a tropical forest.Figure 3Relationship between growth performance, height (cm), and basal area (mm2) of half_sib families of four different species of seedlings in the nursery and the elevation of the locality of the mother tree origin. Shaded areas refer to 95% CI.Discussion.In tropical forests, current limited understanding of whether or not, and to what degree, genetic variation is related to environmental gradients, such as temperature or precipitation clines, limits our ability to: (1) fully understand evolutionary processes and the mechanisms underlying genetic structure in tropical forests; (2) predict population response to climate change, and; (3) predict where to locate plant material with desirable traits linked to growth, carbon sequestration rate, and drought tolerance; all factors that may improve reforestation success to restore degraded landscapes and mediate climate change. We found considerable genetic variation in growth performance in all four species tested and that growth rate by top performing half_sib families was up to 88% higher than the growth rate of the most poorly performing half sib families. In three out of four species, we also found that part of this variation could be predicted by elevation and likely reflects local adaptation to climate. Our research demonstrates the potential for incorporating naturally occurring genetic variation into reforestation efforts to enhance performance of seedlings in all of the study species examined (four out of four species). Our results also indicate that we can locate desirable growth characteristics based on the elevation of seed collection sites (three out of four species) but that seed sourcing guidelines will vary by species because the relationship between seedling performance and elevation varies by species. We used elevation as a proxy for a combination of covarying abiotic factors such as precipitation and temperature because it has often been found to be well correlated to variation among traits of different plant populations, and because weather station data were not available for the physical location of our seed sources. Although we are not able to pinpoint the exact agent of natural selection, predictable phenotypic variation across an elevational cline is evidence of local adaptation, and surprisingly, one of the first evidences of local adaptation in a tropical forest.Partitioning between abiotic and biotic drivers resulting in local adaptation is not possible in our current study, but we speculate why both abiotic and biotic components may be involved in local adaptation processes. Mixed_dipterocarp lowland forests (low elevation) and mixed_dipterocarp hill forests (high elevation) vary considerably in biotic and abiotic conditions that may both impose a suite of selection pressures to natural populations (Barton et al 2020). For example, although soil water availability to plants is high in wet tropical forests our rough estimates suggest that families sourced from high elevation hill forests experience roughly 60% more precipitation than those from lowland forests. As a consequence, reoccurring El Nino droughts are expected to be more severe in lowland forests compared to hill forests (Miyamoto et al 2021). Such droughts may then influence genetic structure resulting in phenotypic variation in drought tolerance (Axelsson et al 2020, 2021; Ng et al 2021). Variation in precipitation has commonly been found to structure populations in other nontropical systems (Alberto et al 2013; Postolache et al 2021). Although scarce evidence of similar patterns of local adaptation exists in tropical forests, one such case has been illustrated in Hawaii where Barton et al (2020) found that populations exposed to low versus high levels of precipitation were more drought tolerant in the widespread tropical tree, Metrosideros polymorpha. However, covarying with precipitation is lower temperature, lower soil nutrient availability from higher leaching rates, reduced plant competition, and potential variation in herbivore and pathogen loads, all with high potential to influence the causes of local adaptation. It is beyond the scope of our paper to partition the potential for these different factors and their interactions to influence local adaptation and certainly much research is needed to disentangle these factors. While we are unable to tease apart the evolutionary mechanisms responsible for genetic divergence, it is still worth highlighting that elevational gradients can help us locate different and desirable phenotypes. Whether or not we understand how they evolved, we can still start to test their use in reforestation trials to achieve restoration objectives. We could pre_adapt forests to climate change such as through increasing the frequency of drought_tolerant phenotypes on the landscape or use a wider range of genetic material as a bet_hedging approach to cope with environmental uncertainty (sensu Axelsson et al 2022).In addition to the difficulty in identifying the underlying mechanisms of local adaptation, that is, the specific or multiple selection agents, our research also suggests the compounded complexity that such selection agents may differ among species. We found that the effect of elevational clines on genetic variation in seedling growth was idiosyncratic among species suggesting that selection agents may differ among species. In two species, families from lower elevations had higher growth than those from higher elevations, whereas we found the opposite in one species, and no pattern in a fourth species. Clearly, environmental variation can impose diverging selection pressures across climate gradients (Alberto et al 2013; Kremer et al 2014) and the direction of selection may depend on species specific constraints making some strategies viable for some species but not others (Vitasse et al 2009; Alberto et al 2013). Vitasse et al (2009) demonstrated that genetic_based elevational clines resulted in phenotypic variation taking different directions depending on tree species. In another study, using three species growing in a common garden in a temperate riparian environment, phenotypic variation among populations differed by species with some species showing a high degree of variation and others none (Grady et al 2011). These variable results among species are not surprising given the complexity of species strategies for coping with and adapting to dynamic and interactive evolutionary forces.The production of native seedlings with optimal traits for desired functionality is a significant bottleneck for achieving ambitious global reforestation goals (Gregorio et al 2017). Our results suggest that nursery_based screening approaches can be used to identify genetic variation in desirable traits or functions such as seedling growth performance, drought tolerance (Axelsson et al 2020), and even to support the rebuilding of tree_associated canopy arthropod diversity via traits that correlate to foundation genotypes (Axelsson et al 2022). Our finding of genetic variation in growth performance in the nursery of up to 88% within species reveals a high potential to use standing genetic variation of tropical tree species to speed up production by shortening the time from seed collection to out_planting. As seedling size is a strong predictor of survival of planted seedlings (Andivia et al 2021; Banin et al 2023) it could also be possible to utilize standing genetic variation to produce more vigorous seedling that may have a better chance to survive after out planting. Faster growing seedlings may also have higher potential to better compete with weedy vegetation at restoration sites. However, we acknowledge that although fast growth may be beneficial in some environments such as aseasonal forests in southeast Asia, other traits may be important in more stressful environments or during climate change. For example, allocation of resources to roots may also be important for performance of out_planted seedlings during droughts, which highlights a need to explore such relationships in future studies. Furthermore, it is possible that other mechanisms such as plasticity may help seedlings cope with environmental stress (Cooper et al 2019; Bartholomew et al 2022; Eisenring et al 2022) but it is unclear how plasticity may vary within and among species. Despite such caveats, our demonstration of considerable genetically determined variation in growth performance related to elevational clines opens up a novel line of inquiry into a field that is poorly studied in tropical forests. By knowing where to find fast_growing genotypes, that is, at high or low elevation forest stands, and exploring genetic correlations among relevant traits, there is high potential to increase the ability to identify desirable phenotypes for reforestation.Our research also highlights the potential for incorporating genetic variation of native tropical tree species for production forestry purposes. The goals of forest and landscape restoration include restoring degraded landscapes to provide social, ecological, and economic benefits to local communities (Sabogal et al 2015). In large parts of the tropics, exotic tree species are often preferred over natives in plantation forestry due to their high productivity potential (Piotto et al 2004). Similarly, pioneer Forest landscape restoration (FLR) programs, have relied heavily on the use of exotic tree species (Xu 2011; Temperton et al 2014). The potential for harnessing genetic variation of native tree species has been demonstrated in nontropical systems to enhance growth in forestry timber production systems (Savva et al 2008; Wang et al 2010) and in the design of assisted migration approaches to maintain production with climate change (Grady et al 2015; Zucchi et al 2017; Dixit et al 2021). This has previously not been possible in tropical forests due to the overall lack of studies evaluating intra_specific variation in traits and local adaptation. We are aware of very few studies assessing genetic variation using common garden approaches in the tropics (Ramirez_Valiente & Cavender_Bares 2017; Axelsson et al 2020) and a strategic use of genetic resources is not currently being widely applied to reforestation efforts in the tropics (Thomas et al 2014). Although we recognize that growth rates in our short duration study in the nursery may not translate directly to growth rates in larger harvestable trees, our results do provide evidence of genetic variation in growth that should be further explored for increasing incentives to incorporate native trees into FLR and plantation forestry. Furthermore, seedling size is a strong predictor of seedling performance (Andivia et al 2021; Banin et al 2023) which would imply that our findings in the nursery could be translated to performance in the field.Although our study highlights the potential to use genetic variation for enhancing outcomes of reforestation and restoration of native tropical forests, future studies will need to assess how genetic variation can be utilized in field operations. Our study was conducted in the nursery at one site and may tell us little about performance in large_scale reforestation operations across landscapes that may vary in environmental conditions. Our study highlights, however, that climatically determined variation is likely imposing selection in these systems, a finding that has clear consequences for reforestation. More research is evidently needed to assess how local adaptation may influence site matching and how such site matching may change as a consequence of climate change. Our study illustrates that evolutionary information on the influence of climate on genetic variation has high potential to enhance outcomes of reforestation and forest restoration. Our research highlights opportunities to better understand evolutionary processes in tropical forests and to use such information to improve seed source selection in reforestation efforts. We propose that multi_species common garden experiments, preferably planted across multiple sites in combination with genome_wide association studies would be suitable for building a better understanding of evolutionary processes in tropical forests.AcknowledgmentsWe are grateful to the hard work by graduate students and INIKEA staff during seed collection; J Cowan, V Juin, A Lojingi, A Jeffrin, D Sundolon, M Marjani, T Kurundi, A Lagundi, E Kurundi, B Paul, R Gubin, and M Ahmad. S La Nyang and the late P M Gallus supervised seedling maintenance in the nursery. This research was funded by FORMAS (grant nr: 2016_20005), the Swedish research council VR (grant nr: 2022_04565), the Kamprad family foundation, and a Fulbright ASEAN research award to KCG Authors declare no conflict of interest.